no dates though... have got cabinet reshuffles(right at the bottom), with
approx dates

Former Ministers in the Blair Government



These include those who have

a) been sacked

b) resigned

c) lost their job due to cuts in Ministers after devolution/got a new job in
Scotland/Wales



HOUSE OF COMMONS



Former Ministers/Whips who are still MPs



Graham Allen - Whip/Vice Chamberlain

Janet Anderson - Minister for Tourism, Film and Broadcasting

Tony Banks - Sports Minister

John Battle - Minister of State, FCO

Hugh Bayley - PUS, Department of Social Security

Clive Betts - Whip

Keith Bradley -

Nick Brown - Sec of State, Maff, then Minister for Work, DWP

Stephen Byers - Chief Secretary, Trade Secretary, Transport Secretary

Tom Clarke - Minister for Film/Tourism

David Clelland - Assistant Whip

Robin Cook - Foreign Secretary then Leader of the House of Commons

Ross Cranston - Solicitor General

Jack Cunningham - Minister for Agriculture, Minister for the Cabinet Office/
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster

John Denham - Home Office Minister

Frank Dobson - Secretary of State for Health

Jim Dowd - Whip

Angela Eagle -

Frank Field - Minister for Welfare Reform

Mark Fisher - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Culture/Media/Sport

Derek Foster (for about a day)

George Foulkes -

Michael Hall - Assistant Whip

Doug Henderson - Foreign Office Minister, Minister for the Armed Forces

Kate Hoey - Minister for Sport

Alan Howarth - Minister for Arts

George Howarth - Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Northern Ireland Office

Kevin Hughes - Assistant Whip

Glenda Jackson - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport

Jon Owen Jones - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Wales

Sally Keeble - PuS at DfID

Peter Kilfoyle - Parliamentary Secretary, Office of Public Service, Cabinet
Office and Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence

Helen Liddell - Sec of State for Scotland

Tony Lloyd - Foreign Office Minister

Calum MacDonald - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland

John McFall - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland

Peter Mandelson - Minister without Portfolio, Sec of State for DTI then
Northern Ireland

Michael Meacher - Environment Minister

Alan Milburn - Secretary of State for Health

Lewis Moonie - PuS st the MoD

George Mudie - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for
Education/Employment

Dan Norris - Whip

Greg Pope - Assistant Whip

Joyce Quin - Minister of State, MAFF

Geoffrey Robinson - Paymaster General

Barbara Roche - Minister of State, ODPM

Joan Ruddock - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Women

Clare Short - Sec of State for International Development

Chris Smith - Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport

Gavin Strang - Minister for Tranpsort

Graham Stringer - Whip

Gisela Stuart - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Department of
Health.

Ann Taylor - Leader of the House of Commons / Chief Whip

Paddy Tipping - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Privy Council Office

Keith Vaz - Minister for Europe

Alan Whitehead -

Brian Wilson - Energy Minister

Tony Worthington - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern
Ireland



No longer MPs



Ron Davies - Secretary of State for Wales

Sam Galbraith - Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland

David Lock - Parliamentary Secretary, Lord Chancellor's Dept

Henry McLeish (now MSP) - Scottish Office Minister

John (now Lord) Morris - Attorney General

Mo Mowlam - Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster

George (now Lord) Robertson - Secretary of State for Defence



Dead



Donald Dewar - Secretary of State for Scotland

Derek Fatchett - Minister of State, Foreign Office





HOUSE OF LORDS



Former Ministers



Baroness Blackstone - DCMS

Lord Burlison - Whip

Lord Clinton-Davies - DTI

Lord Donoghue - MAFF

Lord Dubs - Northern Ireland

Lord Gilbert - MoD

Baroness Gould - Whip

Lord Haskel - Whip

Baroness Hayman - DETR, DOH, MAFF

Lord Hoyle - Whip

Lord Hunt of Kings Heath - Health Minister

Lord Irvine - Lord Chancellor

Baroness Jay - Health, Leader of the Lords

Lord MacDonald - Chancellor of  the Duchy of Lancaster

Baroness Morgan - Cabinet Office

Baroness Ramsay - Whip

Lord Sewel - Scottish Office

Lord Simon - DTI



Dead

Lord Williams of Mostyn - Leader of the Lords





Reshuffles since 1997



This brief details the Cabinet level changes in the reshuffles since 1997.
It will be updated as and when further changes are made.



6 October 2003: Lord Williams of Mostyn died, and is replaced as Leader of
the Lords by Baroness Amos. She was replaced as International Development
Secretary by Hilary Benn.



12 May 2003: Clare Short resigned as Secretary of State for International
Development. She was replaced by Baroness (Valerie) Amos, sitting in the
House of Lords.



17 March 2003: Robin Cook resigned as President of the Council and Leader of
the House of Commons. On 4 April 2003 Dr. John Reid was appointed in his
place. Ian McCartney entered the Cabinet and replaced Reid as Minister
without Portfolio and Labour Party Chairman.



23-24 October 2002: Estelle Morris resigned, with Charles Clarke replacing
her as Secretary of State for Education & Skills.  Dr. John Reid replaced
Clarke as Minister without Portfolio (and Labour Party Chairman), and was
replaced as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland by Paul Murphy.  Peter
Hain entered the Cabinet replacing Murphy as Secretary of State for Wales.



28-29 May 2002: Stephen Byers resigned.  His Department for Transport, Local
Government and the Regions was broken up, with responsibility for Local
Government and the Regions transferred to the new Office of the Deputy Prime
Minister under the control of John Prescott.  Alastair Darling became
Secretary of State for Transport, Andrew Smith replacing him as Secretary of
State at the Department for Work and Pensions.  Paul Boateng entered the
Cabinet replacing Smith as Chief Secretary to the Treasury. John Prescott
relinquished control of the Cabinet Office, The Prime Minister assuming
overall control.



8 June 2001. After the 2001 General Election, Mo Mowlam left her post as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and Minister for the Cabinet Office
(which ceased to be a Cabinet position). Baroness Jay was replaced as Leader
of the Lords by Lord Williams of Mostyn. Chris Smith was replaced as DCMS
minister by Tessa Jowell. Ann Taylor was replaced as Chief Whip by Hilary
Armstrong. Nick Brown ceased to be Agriculture Minister, and his department
became DEFRA (which took certain responsibilities from the Deputy Prime
Minister), headed by Margaret Beckett. Beckett was replaced as Leader of the
House by Robin Cook. Cook was replaced as Foreign Secretary by Jack Straw.
Straw was replaced as Home Secretary by David Blunkett. Blunkett was
replaced as Education Secretary by Estelle Morris. Patricia Hewitt replaced
Stephen Byers at the DTI. Byers headed a new department (the DTLR), and took
over certain responsibilities from the Deputy Prime Minister. Charles Clarke
joined the Cabinet as Minister without Portfolio and (a new role) Party
Chairman.



24 January 2001: Peter Mandelson resigned for the second time.  He was
replaced as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland by Dr. John Reid, who
was himself replaced as Secretary of State for Scotland by Helen Liddell.



11 October 1999: Lord (George) Robertson stepped down from the Cabinet to
become Secretary General of NATO; he was replaced at the Ministry of Defence
by Geoff Hoon.  Frank Dobson stood down from the Cabinet in order to
campaign for the Labour Party nomination for the London mayoral election.
Alan Milburn replaced him as Secretary of State for Health and was replaced
as Chief Secretary to the Treasury by Andrew Smith.  Dr. Jack Cunningham
left the Government.  He was replaced as Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster and Minister for the Cabinet Office by Mo Mowlam, who was in turn
replaced at the Northern Ireland Office by Peter Mandelson, making a return
to the Cabinet.



28 July 1999: Alun Michael stood down from the Cabinet to assume his
responsibilities as First Secretary of the Welsh Assembly; he was replaced
as Secretary of State for Wales by Paul Murphy.



23 July 1999: Donald Dewar stepped down from the Cabinet in order to assume
his responsibilities as First Minister of the Scottish Parliament; he was
replaced as Secretary of State for Scotland by Dr. John Reid.  Reid's
successor at Transport (Helen Liddell) did not sit in the Cabinet.



23 December 1998: Peter Mandelson resigned for the first time.  Stephen
Byers replaced him as Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.  Alan
Milburn entered the Cabinet replacing Byers as Chief Secretary to the
Treasury.



22 October 1998: Ron Davies resigned and was replaced as Secretary of State
for Wales by Alun Michael.



22 June 1998: Blair's first reshuffle: Baroness Jay of Paddington replaced
Lord Richard as Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords.  Alastair
Darling replaced Harriet Harmon as Secretary of State for Social Security
and was replaced as Chief Secretary to the Treasury by Stephen Byers.  Dr.
John Reid entered the Cabinet, replacing Gavin Strang as Minister of
Transport.  Dr. Jack Cunningham replaced David Clarke as Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster.  He was replaced at Agriculture by Nick Brown, the Chief
Whip.  Ann Taylor became Chief Whip, retaining her seat in the Cabinet.
Margaret Beckett replaced Taylor as Lord President of the Council and Leader
of the House of Commons and was replaced at the DTI by Peter Mandelson.



TONY BLAIR'S FIRST CABINET

Formed May 2 - 3 1997



Prime Minister                                                   Tony Blair

Deputy Prime Minister & Secretary            John Prescott

of State for the Environment,

Transport and the Regions

Chancellor of the Exchequer                               Gordon Brown

Secretary of State for Foreign & Comm. Affairs     Robin Cook

Home Secretary                                                Jack Straw

Lord Chancellor                                                 Lord Irvine
Of Lairg

President of the Board of Trade                          Margaret Beckett

Secretary of State for Education & Employment    David Blunkett

Secretary of State for Health                             Frank Dobson

Secretary of State for Social Security                 Harriet Harmon

Secretary of State for Scotland                          Donald Dewar

Secretary of State for Defence                           George Robertson

Secretary of State for Northern Ireland                Dr. Mo Mowlam

Minister for Agriculture                                      Dr. Jack
Cunningham

Secretary of State for Wales                              Ron Davies

Secretary of State for Culture                            Chris Smith

Secretary of State for Int. Devt.                       Clare Short

Chief Secretary to the Treasury                          Alastair Darling

Lord Pres. of the Council/Leader of the Commons Ann Taylor

Lord Privy Seal/Leaderof the House of Lords         Lord Richard Of
Ammanford

Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster                  Dr. David Clark

Minister of Transport                                         Dr. Gavin
Strang

